---
Date: 2025-09-17 11:30
Tags: rant, opinion, tech
---

# Not buying American anymore

I feel like I need to first defuse any idea of antagonizing Americans
themselves. The people are never to blame. This isn't a post criticizing the
American people, it's criticizing the state of things that makes it impractical
to have any sort of economical relation with the country if you are an average
Joe like me.

## Where do I come from

I come from a place where I believe regulation needs to be employed to protect
the weaker party in any economic relation. If you don't agree with this
probably this rant isn't for you.

I also come from Brazil, a country that, for better or worse, is arguably a
strongly regulated market. For worse I guess because it makes all transactions
that bit more bureaucratic, for better because I am sure to be able to buy
something and have it too, without fear that corporations will swoop in and
take away my rights after purchase.

The [Consumer Defense
Code](https://www.gov.br/mj/pt-br/assuntos/seus-direitos/consumidor/Anexos/guia-do-consumidor-estrangeiro-ingles.pdf)
is strong and mostly works, at least insofar as I needed to use it, and many
issues can be resolved directly with companies via
[reclameaqui](https://www.reclameaqui.com.br/), which is a website that
streamlines the communication with sellers to resolve problems without having
to go to court.

So here are my biases laid out in advance.

## Why am I writing this

I've been following [Louis Rossmann's youtube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/@rossmanngroup) for a while now, mostly
because their tech repair videos are really interesting. And I really love
cats. But lately I've seen
[many](https://youtu.be/HlyiLQ6WPRU?si=LeS8D1ntWfTUrUUB)
[worrying](https://youtu.be/KNuZ3BjT7IU?si=93NVeqWEI1CO24Nv)
[videos](https://youtu.be/lzdIjCzKhfM?si=dET-MmiWzW7VJixk) in the channel about
anti-consumer practices and I felt like I needed to vent.

You can ask why do I even care about these videos if I don't live in the US.
Well, in a globalized world where we are steadily blurrying the lines that
separate countries and nations (also for better and worse), there is really no
such distinction. Sure when I buy services and pay for them in my local
currency, I'm likely protected by local laws, and also in the case of Netflix
I'm also restricted by geographical limitations, but that's not always the
case, specially when purchasing software.

I've just came across [this
video](https://youtu.be/YAx3yCNomkg?si=PhsAcUN-z7zXpvOC) where Louis explains
what Reason studios did to screw over their customers by removing the option to
activate older products that still work fine. I am also a musician in my spare
time, mostly hobbyist, but I did purchase music production software before and
I could just as easily have been a victim of such customer-hostile practices. I
find it quire unsettling when laws, or lack thereof, of foreign country
directly affects me.

## Current state of things

All this points to a very clear trend, at least for me, that the US is [openly
an
oligarchy](https://www.hks.harvard.edu/faculty-research/policycast/oligarchy-open-what-happens-now-us-forced-confront-its-plutocracy).
And this explains very well this trend of consumer-hostile practices.

If a country and its laws serve the nobility and the extremely wealthy, it'll
work in favor of those, of maintaining their status and wealth. An oligarchy
isn't a regime that is characterized by actively screwing over the common
people. It doesn't need to be. All it needs is to give a free pass for those
that maintain power and influence to do whatever they want in order to maximize
their profits and expand their influence.

This is why all these anti-consumer practices are happening out in the open.
Really... what are the chances that in the current administration a profitable
company will be prosecuted by anti-consumer practices?

Given time, a liberal capitalist democracy with excessively weak regulations
will eventually devolve into a plutocracy just because companies need to make
money to appease investors at all costs. When they are out of ideas for
innovation, or when innovation is just too risky, they will [make their
services
worse](https://www.baldurbjarnason.com/2024/the-deterioration-of-google/),
[violate consumer protection laws if it makes them more
competitive](https://shawlewenz.com/11-times-big-brands-violated-consumer-protection-laws/)
and [make the consumer pay more for
it](https://disconnect.blog/ive-had-it-with-microsoft/), just because it looks
good in a quarterly report -- which I guess [won't be quarterly
anymore](https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/boards-policy-regulation/trump-renews-calls-ending-quarterly-reports-companies-2025-09-16/)
because it's not looking too good lately.

## A counter argument

There is a point to be made that all these changes were made recently and that
there was no reason not to buy American ten, fifteen years ago. And therefore
this logic of not buying American isn't going to work because the same can
happen anywhere else.

But I'd disagree. We can't and we don't need to be able to see the future to
make informed decisions. Ten years ago there was no reason not to buy American.
There is now and that's the end of it. If I start buying European and they
start behaving like the US does now, then this rant will just as easily apply
to them.

A good, informed decision doesn't require knowledge of the future. It just need
to be grounded in solid contemporary facts, and the fact is there is no reason
we can trust American companies anymore.

This rant also isn't to say that *all* American companies are trying to make
the largest possible profit at the expense of their customers. There surely are
legit businesses trying to be profitable at the same time as they care and
protect their customers. Unfortunately these same theoretical companies are
subjective to the current US economical ethos that exposes them to hostile
takeovers and pressure from investors. This is why in an unregulated market
that makes it *that* easy to screw customers over, even those that are honest
good-working citizens can't really be trusted to run stable and responsible
companies in the long run.

## A moral imperative

The TLDR is: if you can, don't buy American. I'm not buying it anymore if I
can. There is little innovation to be had there, little protection to rely upon
and to be honest little incentive to keep buying it, because the rest of the
world is picking up relatively quickly, since all the wealth has had a negative
impact in the incentive for the US industry to keep itself up to date.

Choosing not to buy American is a message. The message is simple. I don't need
it. I would like to keep improving on things, keep working together and be part
of flourishing global community. But I don't have to. I can make do with less
feature-packed alternatives that will serve me longer term. I can do without
all the wealth and shiny things, because honestly in a couple of decades time
nobody will even remember it if the US keeps not paying attention to those that
generate actual value to the world, the people. If you change your laws, if you
can show that you are not out there to get my money at all costs, then we are
back in business. Until them I'm not buying American anymore.

Nothing is too big that it can't be replaced.

## Comments

If you want to comment on this blog post, I invite you to follow the dicussions
on [Hackernews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45277346).

## Responses

Since the publication of this rant yesterday, it got quite a bit of traction in
HN that I honestly wasn't expecting. Some very interesting debates, but I'd
like to address two recurring themes that I feel wasn't properly developed in
the first iteration of this publication.

### Reason isn't an American company

I should have done a better job researching the company as it's a Swedish
company. I am changing the wording in the paragraph that cites the company. It
was intended to be just an anecdote of what prompted me to write this article,
but I shouldn't have used it as an example of the current situation for
consumer protection in America.

### Reason is the sole example in the publication

It isn't. It's just the only one that is directly mentioned here. There are
several links to other articles that do a better job that I could ever do in
cataloguing US companies that illustrate the points in the article. I suggest
everyone reading this to open the articles linked in this publication.

### Other companies in the world also apply anti-consumer practices

Yes, and the point o this publication isn't to advocate for an all-out digital
veganism. The rationale -- which I should have developed better, because now it
feels like shooting an arrow and drawing a target afterwards -- is that if by
choosing not to buy American products the US would be pressured to change it's
laws in favor of protecting the consumer, this would ripple across the free
world and actually change things.

[Some examples cited](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45277977) include
Samsung, Brother and Epson. I'd say if you don't want to buy from them, go for
it. I'm ditching Samsung next time I'm buying a smartphone because [they make
it purposefully complicated to disable notifications for they built-in
bloatware](https://us.community.samsung.com/t5/Galaxy-S23/Can-t-disable-Galaxy-Store-notifications/m-p/2864075#M43549).

However I think the best you can achieve with ditching a company is making this
specific company change its policies. It does very little with the widespread
consumer-hostile stance companies have adopted.

Targeting instead the cultural and economic leader of the west has better
chances of promoting changes that will ripple across all the markets that are
influenced by the US. The US is undisputedly the wealthiest country. It has
therefore the responsibility of setting the example for the rest of the world.

And in all seriousness, what is it that America can't take a little bit of
hopefully constructive criticism? If it can't, I'm sorry to say, it's already
doomed to fail, since this is in part of [why empires
fall](https://www.amazon.com.br/Why-Empires-Fall-America-Future/dp/0300280084).

## Change history

- [add responses and changed wording](https://github.com/gchamon/xd1.dev/pull/6/files)
